the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
view additional materials from hundreds
of MIT courses visit MIT opencourseware
at
ocw.mit.edu one of the cutest little
data structures uh that was ever
invented called the Heap and we're going
to use uh the Heap as an example
implementation of a priority
q and we'll also use heaps to build a
sorting algorithm called Heap Sort um
that is very very different from either
insertion sort or merge sort and it has
some nice properties that neither
insertion sort nor merge sort have but
what I want to do is get started with
motivating
the Heap data
structure regardless of whether you're
interested in sorting or not so the
notion of priority Q I think makes
intuitive sense to all of you it's
essentially a structure that implements
a
set s of
elements and each of these elements
is associated with the
key and as you can imagine a priority Q
is something where you queue up for
something uh you want to buy something
you want to sell something you have
certain priorities assigned to
you and uh you want to pick the maximum
priority or the Min priority you want to
be able to delete it from the queue you
want to be able to insert things into
this queue you want to be able to change
priorities in the queue so all of these
operations are are interesting
operations that should run fast and for
some definition of fast obviously we
interested in the asmic complexity
definition of fast in that case we'll be
saying does this operation run in order
end time order log end time Etc um so in
general I think for the next few
lectures you're going to see uh a
specification of a data structure in
terms of the operations that the data
structure should perform and those of
you who have taken 65 you'll see that
it's basically an abstract data typee
that's associated with this uh these
operations so it's a spec for the
abstract data type um in 65 you didn't
really spend a lot of time on asmic
complexity or the efficiency of
operations on the abstract data type
here in6 we'll specify this
ADT and specify the set of operations or
methods in the ADT and we'll talk about
whether these are order n complexity or
order n log n complexity and compare and
contrast different adts so today's ADT
is a
heap and so what
is the set of operations that we'd like
to perform on a priority queue so we can
use that to motivate the development of
a heap and those are insert SX so you
have a set of elements s and you want to
be able to
insert
element X
into set
s um you want to be able to do Max of
s which is
return the element of s
with the largest
key and different from Max of x s rather
is extract Max of s which not only
Returns the element with the largest key
but
also removes
it from s so this is you have a Q and
and the person in the que was serviced
or the element in the que was serviced
and then removed from the
que um and finally you can
imagine
changing the priority of a particular
element X in the set s and this priority
this an Associated uh key as we have up
up up there with each element and that
key is call it K and increase key s x
K would increase the
value of x's
key to the new value
K right and you know
K could correspond to it's just called
increase uh most of the time uh you're
increasing the value in maybe a
particular application you could have
certainly a decrease key and you'd have
to know what the previous value was and
it's just a matter of exactly what
operation you want to perform you could
call it update and or increment whatever
you
like I'm going to spend most of the time
here talking
about how you
maintain a repin variant of this data
structure called the Heap that allows
you to to do these operations in an
efficient way and we'll talk about what
the efficiency is and we'll try and
analyze the efficiency of these
algorithms that we put up all
right so let's talk about a heap a heap
is an implementation of a priority
Cube it's amazingly an array
structure except that your visualizing
this array
as a nearly complete binary
treat and so what does that mean exactly
well the best way to understand that is
by looking at an
example we got 10 here so one two
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 so here's my array
of 10
elements and the elements
are 16
14 10 8
7 so some set of elements they're in
random order clearly not
sorted and I'm looking at the indices
and I'm looking at the elements and I'm
going to visualize this as has a nearly
complete binary tree it's not a full
binary tree because I only have 10
elements in it and it would have to have
16 uh 15 elements to be a a complete
binary tree and we want to be able to do
the general case of an arbitrary size
array and so that's why we have a nearly
complete here so what does it mean to
visualize this as a tree
well index one is the root of the tree
and that's item with the value
and what I have are indices two and
three are the
children
and four five six and seven are the
children of two and
three
and eight
nine and
10 are the children of uh four and five
in this case and so that's the the
picture you want to keep in your head
for the rest of this lecture anytime you
see an array you say we're going we're
looking at the Heap representation of
the array the picture on the right tells
you what the Heap looks like and so the
I'm not going to fill in all of these
you can but I'll do a couple so you have
10 here
and 8 7
Etc so that's that's a heap structure so
what's nice about this Heap structure is
that uh you have a tree
representation of an array and that lets
you do a bunch of interesting things
what do you
get out of this
visualization well
the root of the
tree is the first
element corresponding to I equal
1 the
parent of
I is I /
2 the left child of I is 2
I and the right child
of I is 2 I +
1 all right so that's essentially what
this mapping corresponds to now on top
of that um this is just what a heap
corresponds to um we're going to have
particular types of heaps that that
we'll call Max heaps and Min heaps and
as you can imagine Max heaps and Min
heaps have additional properties on top
of the basic Heap structure so this is
essentially a definition of a heap now
I'm going to Define what the max Heap
property
is and the max he property says
that the
key of a
node is greater than or equal
to the Keys
of its
children okay that's it um it's
obviously recursive um in the sense that
you have to have this true for every
node in the tree and when you get down
to the leaves of the tree uh they
they're not children corresponding to
the leaves so that's a trivial property
but at higher levels
you're going to have children and you
have to check that so if you look at
this example
here I maybe I should fill this whole
thing out so I have eight and seven here
and six would be nine and I have three
over
here and then two 4 1 right so we can
look at this and and check whether it
has the max heat property or not um does
it have the max heat property do he yeah
all you have to do is look at one these
nodes one two three indices index four
five six and well you don't have to look
at six and seven uh because they don't
have any children uh but you could stop
with u with five here and you you look
at the children and there you go uh the
parent is greater than or equal to
either of its children or its only child
in the case of node five and so you have
the Maxi property right it's a fairly
straightforward
property and you can imagine
defining the Min Heap property in an
equivalent way all right just replace
the greater than or equal to with less
than or equal to so right off the
bat
um what operation is going to be
trivially
performed on a Max Heat this is a kind
of a trivial question
but
yep just finding the biggest element
exactly right um the max operation now
um what about extract
Max is that trivially performed on a Max
Heap no because uh uh so what do I mean
by that by when you say Max is trivially
performed what it means is that you can
return the max you can find the maximum
element or a maximum element and uh you
obviously don't modify the Heap and the
Heap stays the same so it stays a Max
Heap in general when we talk about data
structures and this goes back to repin
variance which I mentioned already you
typically want to maintain this repin
variant and so the repin variant of our
data structure in this case is a Max
heat property okay so if we want to
maintain the max heat property as we
modify the Heap so if you go from one
Heap to another you start with a Max
Heap you want to end with a Max Heap
okay and it makes perfect sense because
um one of the simplest things that you
want to do in a priority queue is you
want to be able to create a priority
queue and you want to be able to run
extract Max on the priority queue over
and over right and what that means is
that you take the max element you delete
it take the next Max element delete it
and so on and so forth and there you go
all right
and it's a bit of a preview here but uh
you can imagine that if you did that uh
you would get a sorted list of elements
in decreasing order right so you see the
connection to sorting because you could
imagine that once we have this Heap
structure and we can maintain the max he
property that we could continually run
extract Max on it and if we could build
extract Max in an efficient way we might
have a a fantastic sorting algorithm all
right
so the big question that really remains
is how do we maintain the max heat
property as we modify the heat okay and
how would you go the other question
which I haven't answered
is
um there's a there's there's um this
array that turns out it was a Max heat
okay but it's quite possible that I have
a a trivial example of a of an
array in fact let me make this
one that is that is not a Max Heap it's
not a Max Heap it's not a Min Heap it's
neither right it's just a heap okay so
if I just
transform or visualized I should say
this array as as a heap I don't have a
Max Heap I don't have a Min Heap so if I
were interested in sorting and I am um
there's there's another thing that's
sort of missing here that we have to
work on which is how are we going to
build a Max Heap out of an initially
unsorted array right which may or may
not turn into a Max seat this trivially
happened to be exactly the right thing
because I picked it and it turned into a
Max SE just by visualizing it but it's
quite possible that you know you have
arrays that are input to your sorting
algorithm that look like that right
yep okay so let's dive into Heap
operations I'm going to have to
spend some
time describing to you a bunch of
different methods that you would call on
a heap and all of these methods are
going to have to maintain our
representation invariant or the Maxi
property
so what are the Heap
operations that we have to
implement and analyze the complexity for
well we're going to have build max
heat which
produces a Max
Heap from an arbitrary or unordered
array so somehow
I got to turn this
into for example 4 2 1 okay which is in
effect sorting this array right or
changing the order maybe not fully
sorting it but changing the order so
that's what I'll have to do and build
max Heap is going to have to do
that in order to do build max Heap um
the
first procedure
that I'm going to describe to you is
called is called Max
heapify right heapify right sounds
sounds a little strange
but I guess you can IFI pretty much
anything um so you correct a
single
violation of the heat property
in a sub
tree uh sub tre's
root okay and I'll explain what I mean
by that in just a
minute so uh Max Cy is the fundamental
operation that we have to understand
here and we're going to use it over and
over um what it does is takes some
something that is not a heap not a Max
Heap when I say not a heap from now
on pretend that I'm saying not a Max
Heap we're only going to be talking
about ma Max heaps for the rest of this
lecture okay uh and what Max cify does
is take something that is not quite a
Max heat it can't take anything
arbitrary it's going to take something
where there's a single violation of the
max heed property at some sub of this
this Heap that is given to you and
there's a single violation of that and
it's got to fix that okay and we need to
be able to do this recursively at
different levels to go build a Max he
from an unordered
array um and then once you have that you
can do all sorts of things like insert
and extract Max and Heap Sort and so on
and so forth so let's take a look at Max
Cy using an example I'm not going to
write pseudo code
for Max cpy I'll run through an example
and the pseud code is in the
notes the big assumption and you can
think of this as a
precondition for running Max C5 is that
the trees
rooted
at left
eye and right eye
are Max
heaps right so max hey is going to take
it's going to look like a comma I a is
simply the array and I is the index okay
and a Max Cy is willing to you're you're
you're you're allowed to crash uh uh and
not do anything useful if this
precondition is violated in Max cp5 but
if the precondition is true
then what you have to do is you have to
return a Max Heap correcting this
violation all right that's the
contract so let's take a look at an
example um I think what I want to do is
start with uh start over
here I wanted you I want you to see all
of the steps here so we'll take a simple
example and we'll run through Max cpy
and let's take a look
at
[Music]
16 for
and I'm just going to draw the indices
for this first example and then I won't
bother so there you go uh is this a Max
Heap no because right here I got a
problem four is less than 14 therefore I
have a violation right and so I if you
look at the call Max
cify 8 comma 2 this is an index two and
all you have to do is to look at this
sub tree and what you
want what you need to be satisfied in
order to run Max cify is that the sub
trees of node index two which is this
four node are Max heeps and if you go
look below
you see that this is a Max he and that's
a Max he okay most of the time by the
way you'll be sort of working bottom up
and that's why this is going to make
sense right this will all work out
because leaves are by definition Max
heeps because you don't have to check
anything right when you put two leaves
together and you want to create a a tree
like like that or a heap like that then
you run Max seify and then you have when
you have a couple of different Max seeps
and you want to put them to together to
make it a bigger Max SE you'd have to
run Max cify right so so that's the way
it's going to work so you want to do Max
cify a comma 2 and one of the things
that's going to be important not in this
example but when we get to sorting is
that we want to know what the size of
the Heap is and in this case the Heap
size is 10 right so what does Max cpy
do well all Max cpy does is ex ex
changes elements and so if you looked at
the code for Max cpy and you walk
through it this is what it would do U
you're going to look at four and 14 and
it's going to say okay I'm going to look
at both my children and I'm going to go
ahead and exchange with the bigger
bigger child so I'm going to
exchange
A2 with
A4 and what that would do is
take
this make this four and make this
14 and that would be step
one and then you would when you get to
this point recursively uh you'd realize
that there the Maxi property at this
level is violated and so you would go
ahead
and call Max Cy
a comma
and when that
happen or that call happens you're going
to look at the two children
corresponding to this little sub tree
there and you're going to do the
exchange you're going to have eight here
and four here so you would Exchange
A4
with
A8
and now you're done so there no more
calls all right so fairly
straightforward it's actually not any
more complicated than this there may be
many steps what might happen is that
you'd have to go all the way down to the
leaves and in this case you went a
couple of steps
and then you got to stop but obviously
you could have a large Heap and it could
take a bunch of time so what is the
complexity of Max
heapify
anybody yeah back there well
you down have to
every every node to make it order n
um everybody anybody AG you have a
different answer log why why is it log n
because I think wor
scenario
okay yeah
so you're you're arguing that the the
solution to the recurrence gives you a
logarithmic complexity all right not
quite um there's there's an easier way
of of arguing this yeah back
there that's right
swap for each level and go all the way
from to that's right so what is the
complexity L log in great good
excellent definitely worth a
cushion who missed you by that much all
right it it was it's pretty soft by the
way right okay so um if I hit somebody
they get a cushion okay
um um all right so uh that's exactly
right uh thanks um uh for that
description um so first off there's
there's two important aspects to this uh
argument the first thing is that we're
visualizing this as a nearly complete
binary tree okay it is not an unbalanced
tree all right we'll talk about
unbalanced trees and balanced trees in
the next couple of lectures but the
visualization of a heap is a nearly
complete binary tree and in fact if you
had 15 elements it'd be a perfect binary
tree okay so the good news is that at
the height of this visualization tree is
bounded by log n okay that's the good
news all right and you want to exploit
that good news by creating algorithms
that go level by level right if you can
do that you're going to have logarithmic
complexity algorithms all right and so
that was one aspect of it the other
aspect of it is the key assumption that
we're making with respect to build max
Heap that there was a single violation
all right it is true that the the answer
that was given was order n you know
would be a problem I could set it up so
so that's actually the right answer if
if I did not have this assumption when
do I have that here um assume that the
trees rooted at left eye and right eye
are Max seeps okay so maybe that's what
you were thinking but this is a key
assumption this is you know going back
and I like uh making connections between
classes um this is a precondition that
makes the the algorithm more efficient
makes the implementation easier and at
this precondition essentially says that
you have to just go down and do a number
of steps that's the number of levels in
the tree which is logarithmic all
right so that's the story here with Max
cpy it's order log
n in terms of complexity that's the
number of steps that you have and it's
a uh a basic building block for all of
the other algorithms that we'll look at
for the rest of this lecture and in
section tomorrow
let's talk about how you would take Max
heapify and use it to do build max Heap
so the first step now let's say that we
want to go and get a nice sorting
algorithm we we don't like insertion
sort we don't like merge sort we'd like
to get a heap based sorting algorithm
one of the things that we need to do as
I said is to take an unordered array and
turn it into a Max Heat
which is a non-trivial thing to do and
once we do that we can do this extract
max deal uh to to sort the array so the
first step is we want to
convert an array A1 through n into a Max
Heat and the key word here is Max he
because every array can be visualized as
a
heat and and I'm I'm I'm am going to
write the pseudo code for build max Heap
because it's two lines of
code
and that's about the limit of U the size
of program I can really
understand or explain I should
say and this is what it looks like
all right that's it Bill Max Heap says
go from I equals n by two down to one
okay Max heapify a ofi all right so
someone explained to me
and why I'm I can start with n / two and
why I'm going down to one yep I saw you
first
leaves are good ah leaves are good good
so leaves are good I'll let you go on
for a second in a second leaves are good
because um if you look at um
elements a of n/ 2 + 1 through
n are all
leaves okay that's a good observation
all right um so and this is true for any
array all right doesn't matter what n is
doesn't have to be a power of two or 2
rais to n minus one or anything like
that so and leaves are good because they
automatically satisfy uh the the max
heat property
continue
yeah that's
right that's exactly right so beautiful
um
won't hit anybody here um so so that's
it the reason this works is because
you're calling Max epy multiple times
but every time you call it you satisfy
the
precondition okay and uh the leaves are
automatically Max seeps when you start
with
n/2 you're going to see two leaves as
your children for the n/2 number right I
mean just pick an example here um n
number two is a of five
right um and so you're out here right
and and in this case you know depending
on the value of n you may have either
two children or just one child and you
have one child but regardless of that
you know that's going to be a maxi
because it's a leaf right and so you
you'll have two leaves and you need to
put them together and that's a fairly
straightforward process of U attaching
the leaves together you might have to do
a a swap based on what the element is
one operation and you get a little small
little tree that's a maxi um and then
you do a bunch of other things that all
work on leaves because n /2 uh minus one
is probably also going to have leaves as
is children given the large value of N
and there'll be a bunch of things where
you work on uh on these level one nodes
if you will that all have leaves as
children and then you work on the level
two nodes and so so on and so forth and
as I said before you're working your way
up and you're only working with Max
heaps as your left child and your right
child all right that makes
sense all right
so uh if you do that uh and this is a
fairly straightforward question and if
you do a straightforward analysis of
this uh what is the complexity of build
max
c y
right so that's a
order order n log n okay
now this is through a simple analysis
now I'm going to give you a
chance to tell
me if you can do better than that or not
in terms of
analysis okay so here's here's the it's
a subtle question all right um it's a
subtle question that I'm asking I'm
saying this is the algorithm all right I
don't want you to change the algorithm
but I want you to change your analysis
right the analysis that sorry you you
just did was you said I got you know
Theta n steps here because it's n by two
steps um looks like each of the steps is
taking log n time so that's n log n and
I I was careful um I put Big O here okay
because that's an upper bomb so that's a
valid answer right can you do better can
you do a better analysis and I'll let
you go first can you do a better
analysis that uh that you know somehow
gives me better
complexity okay how
um a
constant number of comparisons to to Max
to Maxi that all the things below it um
so that would be
uh yeah it's it's it's it's hard to
explain you're you're on the right track
you're absolutely on the right track uh
um so it turns out that and I'll do this
it's going to take a few minutes here
because I had to write some things out
um we got to sum up a bunch of
arithmetic series and so on so it's it's
it's a bit unfair to to have to speak
out the answer uh but the correct answer
in fact uh is that this is uh order n
complexity okay this algorithm that I
put up here if you do a careful analysis
of it you can get order n out of it okay
and we'll do this careful analysis and
I'll tell you why it's order n in terms
of U sort of a handwavy argument okay
the handwavy argument is that you're
doing basically obviously no work for
the leaves but you're not even counting
that because you're starting with n /2
but when you look at the n/2 node it's
uh essentially one operation or two
operations in which way whichever way
you count to build Maxi right and so for
that first level of nodes it's exactly
one operation that the first level that
are above the leaves for the next level
you may be doing you know two operations
and so there's this uh increase in
operations as you get higher and higher
up but there's fewer and fewer nodes as
you get higher and higher up right
because um there's only one node that is
the highest level node the root node
that node has logarithmic number of
operations but it's only one node right
um and then the the ones down at the
bottom have a constant number of
operations okay so I'll put all of this
down and hopefully you'll be convinced
by the time we've done some math here or
arithmetic here but you can quantify
what I just said fairly
easily as long as you're careful about
the accounting that we have to do so
this is this is really truly accounting
analysis is has a lot to do with
accounting and we're just being more
careful with with the accounting as
opposed to this straightforward argument
that wasn't particularly careful with
the
counting so let's take a look at exactly
this algorithm and I want to make an
observation which is what I just did but
i' like to write it out where we say Max
heapify
takes constant
time for
nodes that are one level
about
leaves and in
general order L
time for
nodes that are L levels above
believes okay
that's observation number one
observation number two is that we have n
over four
nodes with give or take one depending on
you know the value of N I don't want to
get uh hung up on floors and ceilings
and in any case we're eventually going
to get an asmic result so we don't have
to worry about that but we have n/4
nodes with level one n/
8 with level
two da da da da da um and one
node at log with with log
n at at sort of the log n level okay
which is the the root node okay so
there's this decrease in terms of nodes
as the work that you're doing increases
all right and that's the careful
accounting that we have to do and so all
I have to do now to prove to you that
this is actually an order and algorithm
is to write a little summation that sums
up all of the work across these
different
levels and so that total amount of work
in the for
Loop can be summed as n / 4 * 1 * C so
there's some um I have one level here
and you know I'm going to do some
constant amount of work for that one
level all right so I'm just going to put
C out there because eventually I can
take away the C right that's the beauty
of astics right so we don't need to
argue about about how much work is done
at that one level how many swaps etc etc
but the fact is that it's these n/4
nodes are one level above the leaf right
that's what's key and then I have n / 8
* 2 C plus n / 16 * 3 C plus BL BL 1
*
log of n c right I'm essentially written
uh in an arithmetic expression exactly
what I have observed on the board above
all right stop me if you have
questions now I'm going to set just to
try and make this a little easier to
look at and easier to reason about I'm
going to
set n / 4 to 2 ra to K okay and I'm
going to simplify and just pulling out
certain things and this thing is going
to translate to C * 2 ra to K
uh times 1 / 2 to 0 2 ided 2 to 1 3 / 2
to 2 Etc k + 1 ided by 2 raised to K
okay
um if that was confusing raise your hand
but it's uh essentially identical given
the substitution instead of just
applying the distributive law all right
and the reason I did this is because I
wanted you to see the arithmetic
expression uh that's in here now we do
know that you know 2 ra to K is is is n/
4 of course uh but if you look at this
expression that's inside
here U what is what is this expression
uh anyone uh can you can you bound this
expression some
one what the
question remember your arithmetic series
from uh whatever it
was GE uh yeah you know better than I
you know I guess you you took those
courses you know more recently but um so
what what happens with that um I mean
those of you who have calculators I mean
you could plug that in and uh you know
answer that yeah no one yeah go
ahead that's exactly what I was looking
for right um essentially well it's it's
not quite two because you have a one
here and you have a one here but you're
exactly right I mean you know two two is
good is astics I mean come on you know
I'm not going to complain about two
versus three right um so the point is
this bounded by a constant okay it's
bounded by a constant all right this is
a convergence series and and it's
bounded by a constant all right and we
can argue about what that constant is um
it's uh it's less than three okay and it
doesn't matter even if K goes to
Infinity right I mean you want K to go
to Infinity but it doesn't matter if K
is small or k is large this is bounded
by a constant
okay and that's the
key observation so what do we have left
what do we have left we have a constant
there okay we have a c which is a
constant and we have 2 raised to K which
is really n okay so there you go there
you have your Theta n complexity okay
now I can say Theta n because I know
it's Theta n right but Big O of n Theta
n that's what it is right so that was a
I'd say a subtle analysis clearly a
little more complicated than anything
we've done so far and let me see if
their their questions how many people
got
this I did too right okay uh someone who
didn't get it ask a question what didn't
you get what step what step would you
like me to repeat
here any particular
step to this thing here right here okay
so you're you're you're not convinced
that that this expression got translated
to this expression all right so let me
let me try and convince you of that all
right so let's take a look at each of
the terms okay um n by4 is 2 ra to K I'm
just looking at this term and this term
okay n by4 is 2 ra to K right C is C all
right and I just wrote one
as uh as 1 ided 2 raed to 0 which is one
okay and the reason I want you to do
this is because I wanted to show you an
expression where in some sense this is
the term that is the summation for your
expression if you just replace this with
you can write that out as I equal uh 0
through
k um I + 1 / 2 to I all right that is
the symbolic form of this expression
which came from here all right and then
the argument was made that this is a
convergence series and is bounded by a
constant all right that makes sense good
um so that's pretty neat right I I mean
you had the same algorithm and and voila
it suddenly got more efficient right
doesn't always happen but that tells you
that you have to have some care in doing
your analysis because what really
happened here was you did a rudimentary
analysis you said this was order log n
Big O log n and you said this was Theta
n and you ended up with this but in
reality it's actually a faster algorithm
all right so that's the good news build
max Heap can be done in order end time
um now in the time that I have left it
turns out we're essentially
uh all the way to Heap sword because all
we have to do is uh use once we have
build max Heap I'll just write out the
code for Heap Sort and you can take a
look at uh examples in the
notes the pseudo code I should say for
Heap Sort and it looks like this the
first step that you do is you build max
heat from the unordered
array
okay um then you find the maximum
element A1 all of this I've said
multiple
times now the key step is you could do
extract Max but one nice way of handling
this is to swap the elements a
n with
A1 okay and let me write this out and
I'll explain exactly what uh that means
now the maximum
element is at the end of the
array okay when you do the swap that's
the one step that I'll have to spend
another minute on now we
discard node
n from the Heap simply by decrementing
Heap
size so the Heap becomes n minus one in
size from n in the first
iteration now the new
root which after the
swap May
violate Max he we'll call it the MHP the
max he
property but the
children are Maxs
because that's the one node that can
possibly violate it so what that means
is we can run Max
heapify to to fix this and and that's it
once you do that you go back to to that
step so what's happened here exactly
well this part you know we spent a bunch
of time on you know that the top element
is the maximum element so you grab that
and you know that that's the max maximum
element um you don't want to just one
way of doing it is to use extract Max
but rather than doing extract Max which
I haven't explained to you um you could
imagine that you go off and you swap the
top element with the with the bottom
element and then you discard it so
here's a trivial example where let's say
I
had uh
four two and one which is the max Heat
what would happen is you'd say I'm going
to take four and I'm going to swap it
with one and so you have one two and
four now a four is used to be A1 and
that's the maximum element and I'm just
going to delete it from the Heap which
means I'm going to end up with a heap
that looks like a heap not a Max Heap
that looks like this and I write down
four here four is the first element in
my sorted array now I look at one and
two and and one and two this is
obviously not a Max Heap but I can run
Max I know that the child is a Max Heap
so I can run Max heapify on this and
what this turns into is two and one okay
and at this point I know that the max is
the root because I've run Max Cy and I
take two out and at this point after
this it becomes trivial but that's a
general uh algorithm so this whole thing
takes order n log n time because even
though build max Heep is is order n um
the max element is constant time uh
swapping the elements is constant time
uh but uh running Max cp5 is order log n
time and you have n
steps
so you have an order n log n algorithm
but the first step was order n which is
what we spent a bunch of time on so I'll
show you um there examples in the notes
and uh we'll you you'll get covered
again in section I'll Stick Around for
questions see you next time